So, I go over here to my pages and
I go to Lessons, Step Through Debugging.
Okay, so we're gonna be spending quite
a bit of time in the Sources panel,
cuz that's where you do
the step three debugging.
Let me close all this stuff out, just so
we're all on kind of
a same even playing field.
And if I look in the console, I can see
that I definitely have some stuff that's
logging to the console saying hello,
'cause I'm very creative.
So we go into sources, and
on the left side we see all of the assets
that came down during that page load.
So you can see my local host application
here, and you can see it sent down CSS,
JS and a lesson.
The lesson is HTML, so
if I click through here.
The JS is some code [INAUDIBLE] here.
And the CSS is that style.css, so
kind of what we'd expect to see.
So let's spend our time inside the JS
file, and I tried to keep it quite simple.
We've got a set interval, and
it runs every 500 milliseconds.
And it sort of does this thing
where it's got functions calling
other functions because I thought that
would be a nice way to visualize things.
The interval itself calls function 1,
function 1 calls function 2,
function 2 then calls
a little bit of a split.
It does like a math random, and
if it goes one way, it calls 3,
goes the other way, it calls 4.
We feel all right about that,
it's just basically a few
functions calling each other.
So, we can do some kind of cool things,
we could set a break point
here on the if check.
And if I hit play it'll wait till another
five hundred milliseconds kinda goes
through.
And every time it's about to
execute this code, it pauses.
And the pausing will gray out the screen.
It'll put this little kind of yellowy,
white pause in debugger symbol at the top.
And it'll sort of activate
this right sidebar.
So for now, we don't really need this
left sidebar anymore, this was just for
kind of selecting the file.
So I'm gonna go ahead, and
I'm gonna kinda hide it away.
So we've got our source code here, and
we've got the kind of step through
debugger over here on the right.
And again,
I'm just gonna kinda minimize everything.
So to try to make it not
as super overwhelming.
So this is kind of our minimal case.
We're paused on a line that we paused on.
The application is not running,
it is paused right now.
We've got all these different options for
things to inspect.
And we've got our stepping options, right?
So we've got play and stop.
We've got step over, we've got step into,
we've got step out of, and
then we've got the generic step, right?
And these basically do
the same kind of thing.
We're paused here, if we were paused,
and we wanted to step into function 3.
We could click step into, if we wanna step
over function 3, we could click step over.
If we just wanna go to the next line,
we can click step.
And if we're done with this, we can just
kinda hit play, and play it through.
So some other really interesting things
that come here though are while you're
paused in this execution context,
you actually get access to everything the
app would have access to at this point.
So for an example,
is we can see in this function that
it gets this variable passed in foo.
And we can see this nice,
little handy thing,
Chrome Dev Tools tries to
fill things in for you.
So it actually shows you the value
of random number, the value of foo.
You'll notice, if I hit play again,
it'll be a different random number
because it's generated again.
So you can see that the random
number changes each time.
But let's say it wasn't able to give
us these things in such a nice way.
We can expand this watch panel.
And so, what this watch panel will be
is it allow you to add new things, and
you can add anything in
the scope of your application.
So you could add anything from the global
scope, or from a contained scope, or
from this scope, like foo,
and it'll show it.
You can try to evaluate things,
like bar that we don't have, and
it'll show bar is not available,
we don't have that.
So this is, again, all context aware, and
kind of to prove that if we go up here,
and we pause here now we haven't
executed this line yet, so
foo doesn't exist at this point.
So we can see the watch has
updated now foo is undefined.
So that sort of makes sense.
So it is highly context aware
from where your stopped.
The watch will re-evaluate
everything you're stopped at, and
kind of give you what it has access to.
We move forward, now foo is defined.
So, another really nice thing that
we can see is the call stack,
which is basically like you paused
execution here, but how did we get here?
And so for a contrived example like this,
it's quite easy.
We can see we're in function 2, and
it highlights we came from function1.
Here's where function1 called function2.
That came from inside this anonymous
function here where it calls function1.
But for a real web application,
this can be really valuable,
where you know where you are, but
you really wanna see, from my full app
load, how did I get into this code base?
And again,
as you click through the call stack,
you'll notice the watcher updates, right?
Because that watcher re-evaluates.
So here, foo was not defined, here foo
was defined when it was called, and
here foo is still defined.
So this can be a really nice
way to pause the application.
Remember I said,
stepping is not time traveling, but
the call stack walking is time
traveling in this sense, right?
Because it's captured that whole session.
So if foo was not defined here,
defined here, not defined here, defined.
You can go back and
forth through the call stack.
You just can't step
backwards in the debugger.
So yeah, so this is great.
And then the last thing I kinda wanna
point out for this section is scope.
So, I know there's a lot of fantastic
courses on Frontend Master,
how JavaScript works as a language and
how scope works.
And we've got these sorts of
different options with our VARs and
our lets and cons.
We've got this function scope,
all this stuff you can all
learn on a separate course.
But the cool thing here is that these
Dev Tools put together where you are in
the application.
You're inside a function,
inside a function, and
they give you access to everything
you'll have access to at that line.
So you can see that two things that we
have access to are foo which came past in,
and the Global Window object,
which has all this stuff on it.
But in a more advanced application,
you could get a really nice insight
here into what you had scope access to.
Does that feel all right for people?
Basically, it's kind of
like putting together
variables you would have access to at
that point in time, in the code base.
Some other stuff to cover is this idea of,
so we've got these breakpoints,
we've got a few different
ways to set them.
So I'm gonna go ahead, and I'm gonna
unset them by clicking on them here, and
play through the application.
So one way to set them is to
come into this Sources tab, and
to click on a line number,
and that'll set a breakpoint.
And when that breakpoint hits, it will
pause there, and I'll deselect it there.
Another way that you can get there, which
might be easier with large applications,
is you can set them with this
magical debugger statement.
So if we go into debugging.js.
>> Jon Kuperman: And we are to come here,
we can go ahead and start a new line and
write this debugger statement.
So, these debugger statements will be
a no op If the dev tools are closed,
they won't run at all.
But if the dev tools are open,
it'll add a break point there, and
it'll bring your user there.
Now, lint for these, because you
can deploy these to production,
and not know about it until somebody
happens to have their dev tools open, and
it'll just add these break points.
So, now if we come back, we refresh
the page, we see there's a debugger, and
then as the timer fired,
it stopped at that debugger.
>> Student 1: That worked in production.
>> Jon Kuperman: Yeah, so the debugger
word, if it makes it into your production
bundle, and
any user has the dev tools open,
it will stop there so- [INAUDIBLE] But
if it's not open, it's okay, yeah, yep?
[INAUDIBLE]
>> Jon Kuperman: Yeah, yeah,
all the linters have built-in
rules to catch debug statements.
Yeah, there's built-in rules.
>> Student 2: Does it do anything
other than a break point, or
is it-
>> Jon Kuperman: No,
it just pauses execution.
>> Student 1: It's not
really that dangerous.
>> Jon Kuperman: It's not
the end of the world at all,
it just can be kind of a goofy thing.
It's more gonna affect your co-workers
than your users, right, where they're
gonna be every time I try to open Chrome
now I get stopped at this random.
I was like, yeah,
I committed a debugger, sorry.
Yeah, it's not a security problem,
it's just a kind of funny annoyance.
So let's go ahead and remove this.
And then, I wanted to show you one
other one, which, again, doesn't
come up super often, but I find when it
does come up, it's extremely valuable.
So you can go ahead, and
set a break point, and
it'll stop every time we hit foo.
And let me go ahead and
play this through, but
you can set conditional break points too.
So I can go ahead, and I can right-click
on this, and I can edit the break point.
And so this comes up for me a lot,
this math example is contrived, right?
It's either gonna be more than 0.5 or
less than 0.5.
But there's lots of cases in an
application where you have a helper foo,
I use this all the time.
Let's say you have a Fetch wrapper, and
your whole app uses the fetch wrapper.
Every time you make a HTTP request,
you use my custom fetch, and
you pass in a URL.
And you really wanna add a breakpoint, but
you only wanna add the breakpoint when
you hit this new endpoint
that you've created, right?
And so you could do a custom breakpoint,
and you could say the condition would be,
if URL is equal to mycustomendpoint.com,
something like this.
So you can set these in,
where you have these helper functions
that fire like a million times.
But you only wanna stop in a certain case,
these conditional
breakpoints can be great.
For our case we could say,
what if you only stop if random
number is greater than 0.7,
or something like that.
And then basically you can go ahead and
hit play, and this will run for
quite a while, until eventually the random
number is 0.89, and then it stops.
But can you see how that would be useful
in an app with like helper functions to
kind of stop it there?
So the conditional break
points are really great.
And then the last thing I just wanted to
cover is that you can go even further
with these.
You can set,
like a fetch break point, right?
So again, with my example earlier,
instead of conditional breakpoint,
you could add a new fetch one to say,
okay, stop if we make an HTTP request, but
only if the URL contains the word feed,
or timeline, or something like that.
And it'll do the same thing there.
You can do similar things with the DOM
break points, which is what I showed
earlier, where you can right-click,
you can add a break point.
You can say break on one of these things.
All of that will eventually
end up in this Sources panel,
where you can see all the different
break points that you have.
Yeah, so I think at a very high level,
that's kind of the idea here is that
you've got your stepping logic.
So again, if we stop over here at function
1, and we kind of wanna see what goes on.
We can go ahead and
step into function 1, and
we'll get in here like we would expect.
And then,
if we were to step out of function1,
we would go to the end of the file
because there's no time traveling.
So function1 will call it subfunctions.
But as far as we're concerned, we're done.
If we hit play again, and we click step
over function1, we miss everything else,
because we've stepped over,
we get to the end of the function call.
So we can hit play again.
We can go into function 1,
then we can go ahead and go 1 next,
this is just a variable assignment.
We can see this calls function 2,
that one I wanna step into, so
we step into function 2, and
we can kind of move through our codebase.
Now, important thing,
this works with multiple files, so
this example is a bit silly,
contrived because it's all here.
But if you have a giant codebase
with hundreds of different files,
this is a very easy way to get into
the actual source code that's causing
whatever it is you're looking for.
>> Student 2: Do you have any tips for
using the debugger with minified or
transpiled code?
>> Jon Kuperman: Yeah, that's excellent.
So, I think that truthfully,
the step through debugger will be the most
useful when you have source maps, right?
So it'll be the most useful when
you're either in debug, local mode.
Building, or
if you build a production, or maybe
a CI build with source maps attached.
So if source maps are there, then it
will run everything you do here through
the source map, and it will show you
the unminified, uncompiled code.
That being said, sometimes you're gonna
have an issue on production that you're
just trying to get through, and it can
be quite difficult with the debugger.
One thing I will add that could
help a little bit is if you go to
the Settings cog, and
you go to this ignore list,
you can add some ignore exclusions for,
let's say, common library code.
So if you're really stuck on
something gnarly in production code,
you could ignore.
Well, I know it's not a react bug,
so ignore react.js,
I know it's not in Lodash, ignore that.
So you can kind of narrow it down and
eventually, your breakpoints and
your step-through will only go
through your application code,
which can make it a bit easier.
But I would say,
if it's too difficult in production,
if there's any way you can get source
maps enabled, even to enable them for
production for a few days while
you work on this could be great.
Because all of these runs through
Google DevTools, source maps, so
it will always apply them, yeah.
>> Student 2: Does this show
between extensions as well as your
production code?
>> Jon Kuperman: This will just
show the extensions as well.
It will,
we will stop an extension code sometimes,
like another area where you can get
kind of bit where you're like, man,
my password manager is
the thing that called that.
>> Student 2: They can read each other.
>> Jon Kuperman: Yeah.
>> Student 2: So you're looking at the
whole picture of everything on the page.
[INAUDIBLE] and everything.
>> Jon Kuperman: Exactly, yep.